Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Jennifer Nagle. She's professor
in the department of philosophy at the University of
Toronto. Her research focuses on knowledge, belief, and our.
Capacities to track these states in ourselves and others,
and today we're going to talk mostly about epistemic
intuitions, knowledge, common knowledge, and some other related topics.
So Dr. Nagle, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
Pleasure to be here. Thanks very much for the
invitation.
So, I've already had many interviews on the topic
of epistemology on the show, but I don't think
I've ever talked at least directly about epistemic intuition.
So could you start by giving us, um, a
definition? What are epistemic intuitions?
Epistemic intuitions are these sort of immediate, uncalculated, spontaneous
impressions we have. Of whether somebody does or doesn't
know something. Um, THERE'S actually a broader category of
epistemic intuitions where we're not just looking at impressions
of states of knowledge itself, but also related states,
like maybe the state of being justified in thinking
something, even if you don't know it. Uh, MY
own work focuses primarily on impressions of knowledge, um,
because, in part because I think those other impressions,
like whether somebody's justified. ARE, um, kind of downstream
from knowledge, and, um, they depend ultimately on our
capacity to track what is and isn't known. Um,
SO I think that's the, that's the best, um,
point of departure. Uh, AND I think it's just
amazing, um, that we have these impressions at all.
They're not something you get just when you're, you
know, reading a philosophy article or something like that.
You can have the impression when you're talking to
somebody on the street, um, maybe that they know
something or that they don't know something, um, in
everyday conversation, as you're bouncing back and forth, asking
people questions, reacting. Um, YOU have to have a
sense of what they do and don't know, even
just to decide, look, am I going to tell
this person this thing or ask them. Um, AND
even in interactions where you're not even talking, uh,
you're just walking down the street, uh, you make
judgments. Um, IS this person who's coming towards me
like completely absorbed in their phone? I don't assume
that they know that I'm, I'm, I'm gonna have
to step out of their way. Um, SO how
we're interacting with each other, deeply connected to our
impressions of whether they do or don't know. And
knowledge itself is like, it's just kind of abstract.
You might think it's kind of like an invisible,
um, uh, condition out there in the world. It's
not like, you know, when someone knows a fact,
it's not like them running or jumping, um, that
has really obvious surface level. Um, CHARACTERISTICS that you
could just pick up with ordinary sense perception, um.
It's possible to know things in a lot of
different ways, and there are so many different things
that someone might or might not know. So it's
just a really interesting question. How do we get
these impressions of knowledge and its absence, and how
do we in real time, uh, calculate what's going
on? And then, you know, once you have a
an idea of how this is working, you can
ask, well, how good are those impressions? How, how,
how, how accurately are we, are we tracking the
presence and absence of knowledge? Cause of course, sometimes
you think someone Know something and you discover they
don't or, or vice versa.
And so how do philosophers approach epistemic intuitions? How
do they approach these sort of impressions of knowledge?
Uh, I mean, I'm asking you that because later
I'm also going to ask you about scientific approaches
to epistemic assessments like the ones coming from linguistics
and psychology, for example, but how do philosophers do
it?
So it It really depends on the philosopher. Um,
PHILOSOPHERS have approached epistemic intuitions in all sorts of
different ways. Um, THE nature of knowledge itself is
a huge philosophical question across all traditions. And philosophers
from multiple historical traditions have used impressions of knowledge,
pre-theoretical impressions of knowledge as a guide for the
construction of their theories. So in Plato, for example,
Um, you see, uh, his great dialogue, the Theattas,
struggling with this question of the nature of knowledge,
and, um, and there's a, there's an issue at
some point whether knowledge is just true judgment. Uh,
AND, uh, Socrates gives a great example of a
true judgment that isn't knowledge. So you have somebody
who is actually innocent of a crime. Um, BUT,
uh, their lawyer doesn't have much time to convince
the jury. Um, AND the lawyer, it seems actually
doesn't even really care whether the guy is innocent.
Um, BUT if Plato says it's the kind of
thing that you would really have needed an eyewitness
there to know the truth of it. Um, BUT
actually it doesn't matter for, for this particular innocent
man because his, his lawyer is just great with
the rhetoric and persuades the jury, not through evidence
at all, um, that the client is an innocent,
innocent man, and the jury acquits. And, and then
the question is, if, if a member of the
jury. Believes that or judges that this man is
innocent. Do they actually know that he's innocent, just
on the basis of that beautiful speech that the
lawyer gave, which had nothing to do with evidence.
And if you're like Plato, you get the feeling,
no, this guy doesn't know. There's a gap between
just judging truly and, and knowing and um And
That there's a gap there is actually one of
the few things that Socrates says he knows to
be the case. He says this in Mino, in
the Mino, he says, yeah, he's famous for, for
claiming not to know a lot of stuff, but
one thing he does know, he says, is that,
um, knowledge is not the same as just true
judgment, seems to demand something kind of more. So
you have, you have in that tradition. Um, uh,
THE use of these pre-theoretical, you know, you're just
rolling on your gut sense, yeah, that juryman doesn't
know that the guy's innocent. Um, AND you see
it in other traditions too, so you see it
in the South Asian tradition as well. Um, SO
can I tell you another quite different example from,
from that tradition? OK, so, um, uh, this example
is from an 8th century philosopher called Dharmutara, and,
um, He, he considers uh. A character who. SEES
in the distance what looks like a cloud of
smoke rising from a hillside. And um and he
says, Yeah, there's a fire burning at that spot.
And, and actually what he says is true, um,
there is a fire burning there, and this guy's
actually kind of justified in making his, in making
his, his judgment, right? Because judging that there's a
fire burning from smoke is a pretty rational thing
to do, that's pretty good evidence. However, Demater says,
if you zoom in, Um, at this spot. Um,
Some meat has been placed over a fire, and
the meat has attracted a great swarm of insects,
um, and there's no smoke at all. The fire
has just been lit a few, a few seconds
ago. Um, SO what our guy is seeing from
the distance is actually not smoke at all, which
is a sign of fire. It's a swarm of
insects, which is not a sign of fire. Um,
AND therm asks, like, does this person know that
there's a fire burning at the spot? And maybe
you have the impression, no, he doesn't. Um, AND
that's something that actually is a bit of a
clue, uh, to the nature of knowledge. It, it
indicates that knowledge might not be just true judgment
that's based on pretty good evidence. Seems like there
has to be something more to it than that.
Um, SO, philosophers have used epistemic intuitions as, um,
sources of initial evidence, and then there's different ways
you can go on this, depending on what kind
of philosopher you are. Some philosophers try to use
all of our impressions of knowledge and really sculpt
a theory of knowledge that will fit all of
those data points. The trouble we've discovered in the
20th century is that the data points are really
bizarre. Um, SO you can also sometimes have intuitive
impressions of knowledge that end up being paradoxical, and
end up driving the construction of sort of peculiar,
um, uh, uh, sometimes really counterintuitive theories. Uh, SO,
so there's theories, um, that are quite skeptical in
nature, because, you know, sometimes if you think twice
and really focus on it, it seems like you
can't even really know, you know, that there's a
hand in front of your face, uh, cause you
might be dreaming. Um, AND, uh, it's very hard
to have an elegant theory of knowledge that respects
all those data points. So my own work kind
of tries to steer a middle course. I take
some evidential support from, from intuitions, but at the
same time, I also try and figure out, are
some of these data points, um, sort of the
equivalent of perceptual illusions? Are they being generated by,
um, features of our knowledge tracking capacity? Um, THAT
are not guaranteed to get you to the truth
about knowledge.
And uh I mean, what are the main philosophical
views of epistemic intuitions? I mean, are there different
kinds of theories or how does it work in
philosophy?
I mean, again, that's just like a really huge
question. I mean, Plato thought that, you know, before
your birth, your soul is exposed to the forms,
and you are actually like remembering the forms. um,
PEOPLE are all over the map on this. Um,
SOME people want to have um very much sort
of usage driven views so that knowledge just is
whatever our senses employing the word knowledge might be
picking out. I think that that approach ends up
being kind of incoherent. Um, I think there's, there's
just a great diversity of different ways you can,
you can, you can approach, um, epistemic, uh, epistemic
intuitions, epistemic judgments. Um, I mean, one big thing
to say is that these judgments are pre-theoretical. Um,
THEY concern particular cases. I'll tell you a story
about a guy, I'll tell you a story about
a stopped clock. Um, I could bring you into
the lab and um have you. Uh, READ the
story on screen and I can do eye tracking
to see, you know, which details of the story
you focus on and whether that has an impact
on, uh, on your judgment. But, um, but all
these pre-theoretical particular cases then have to be brought
together in some way to serve as data or
a constraint on your theory of what knowledge is,
which is going to be something ideally much simpler
and, uh, and, and more unified. Uh, THERE are
some people who say that. Um, WE don't actually
rely on intuitions at all. I think these are
usually, so the Herman Capellan is in this category.
I think these are usually people who have, um,
uh, uh, a very strange idea of what an
intuition would have to be. So, for example, if
you thought that intuitions have to be, you know,
absolutely Um, flawless touchstones of the truth, uh, then
yeah, maybe we don't, we don't have any intuitions.
I don't think that's the best read on, uh,
on what they are. Um, I think, uh, I
think, uh, intuition is a real category psychologically, uh,
and, um, and we can have a sort of
philosophically defensible use of that category and sculpting theories
of knowledge.
And uh I mean, in what ways does the
philosophical approach to epistemic intuitions differ from a scientific
approach, like, for example, what we can get from
linguistics and psychology. I mean, in what ways do
they differ and do you think that the scientific
research can inform epistemology?
So I think, uh, scientific and philosophical research in
this domain are ultimately somewhat continuous, but, um, but
there might be different ambitions of, of, of these
various programs. So if you're a philosopher, uh, like
me, Uh, maybe not all philosophers are trying to
do this, but, um, but you're interested in the
ultimate question of actually what is the right thing
to say about knowledge? How is knowledge itself most
appropriately characterized? Most of the psychologists who are working
on epistemic intuitions aren't looking at that question. They
are taking for granted. Granted, some kind of background,
philosophical view about what knowledge is. And they're really
focused on the question of how do human beings
detect this, or how do non-human primates or corvids
in the lab detect this state in each other,
which they can do, interestingly enough. So, um, chimpanzees,
for example, react differently to knowledgeable and ignorant competitors.
Um, AND really interesting question, how they are doing
that, um, and what commonalities we might have with
them. But I think even just to set up
the experiment, um, whether it's with a chimpanzee or
developmental psychologists do a lot of work with babies.
Um, YOU'RE checking whether, I don't know, an 18
month old baby can tell the difference between somebody
who does and doesn't know what's in the box.
Um, EVEN to set up the experiment, you've got
to have some kind of pre-theoretical grip on what
does the situation look like when someone knows what's
in the box. Um, SO you have some, you
know, perceptual access. THE contents or something like that.
Well, that's actually like a bit of a philosophical
theory behind that, that if somebody's direction of gaze
is down into the box, uh, they know what
it, they know what it contains. So, I think,
uh, psychologists are typically taking philosophy for granted in
running their experiments. Um, AND in another weird way,
philosophers are kind of taking psychology for granted. Intrusting
their intuitions about particular cases, right? Like I'm, I'm
thinking, these feelings that I have that Plato's juryman
doesn't know, that Thermodera's distant viewer doesn't know, they're
coming, they're not just random noise, um, they're coming
from something systematic, uh, within me. And uh that's
a way of taking, taking the psychology for granted.
So I think ideally you'd want to kind of
bring these things together and um I should say
in the psychological investigation of epistemic intuitions, there's a
lot of struggle and confusion, right? There's results that
are hard to replicate, there are um uh theoretical
roadblocks that people have run into. In particular, trying
to figure out Whether when I react to somebody
else, I'm reacting to what I think they believe
or to what I think they know. And, um,
and I think a lot of the troubles in
the psychological literature are coming from a failure to
think hard enough about the philosophical relationships between conditions
like believing and knowing. Um, SO people are sometimes
making, I think, philosophical mistakes, uh, in their theorizing
in psychology. I think they're making sometimes psychological mistakes,
uh, in their philosophical theorizing about, about knowledge. Um,
SO, so I, so I myself think there's a
difference of ambition. Um, BUT there's a lot of
commonality. You mentioned linguistics too, so linguists have a
lot to say about um the difference between Verbs
that attribute states of knowledge and verbs that attribute
states of belief, there's a really big contrast, splitting
two big classes of what are called proposition embedding
verbs. So proposition embedding verbs are verbs like hope,
um, think. Um, EXPRESSIONS like be sure that those
can always link a particular subject, like me or
um Obama or Drake or whatever, to a particular
proposition, like um where the proposition is some fact.
I can specify the fact directly, um, like, uh,
you know, that the window is open, or um
uh that Drake has a house in Toronto. And
I can also express it indirectly by using a
sort of WH term, so I can talk about
um whether the window is open or where Drake
has a home. Either of these constructions can be
um can be embedded under a proposition. Uh, A
propositional attitude verb like hope, believe, think, no. Here's
the big contrast. Anything that's in the family of
the verb no, is called factive. A factive verb
can only properly take a true compliment. Um, SO
if you, um, know whether the window is open,
your attitude on the question of whether the window
is open has to be true. Um, AND verbs
like believe, hope, be sure that, those are called
nonfactive, so they can take either true or false
compliments. You could believe that the window is open
when in fact it's closed. Um, IT'S closed behind
you, and that breeze you're feeling is coming from
a fan. Um, YOU could be sure that Drake
has a house in Toronto, but maybe he's just
sold it, you know, this morning, and he no
longer has a house in Toronto. Uh, SO, so
be sure that is non-factive. It's the kind of
attitude that could stick you with either a truth
or a falsehood. Now, the amazing thing about knowledge,
and this is from linguistics, the amazing thing about
knowledge is, it's not just a factive verb sticking
you only to truths, it's the mother of all
factive verbs. It's the thing that is entailed by
all factive mental state constructions, I should say. So,
um, so there are other, um, factive mental state
constructions like seeing that or being aware of that.
Um, RIGHT? So I could see that there are
some coins on my desk, I could be aware
that there are some coins on my desk, I
could close my eyes and remember that there are
some coins on my desk. Um, ALL of those
entail that I know that there are some coins
on my desk. Um, SO knowing is like the,
the common thread that runs through all of these
active constructions. Um, AND that's something very special about
it that linguists have found. And I think that's
actually the key to understanding the nature of knowledge
itself. Mhm.
Yes, and let's talk about knowledge then. I know
that this is, I know that this is, if
not the biggest, at least one of the biggest
questions in epistemology, but what, what is knowledge? What
constitutes knowledge?
So here my position is um. I informed by
Timothy Williamson's approach. So Timothy Williamson is an Oxford
philosopher who's argued for what's called the knowledge first
approach in epistemology. Williamson characterizes knowledge as the most
general factive mental state. Um, THAT'S a characterization of
what knowledge is. It's not a reduction of knowledge
into components like, well, knowledge is true belief plus
a bunch of other conditions, um, where these other
conditions are maybe causal conditions or conditions that aren't
themselves defined in terms of knowledge. Um. And, uh,
and I think that's actually the right approach, um,
but maybe it takes some explaining what exactly that
amounts to, to say that knowledge is the most
general factive mental state, um, but, uh, but I
think it's actually ultimately very intuitive. So, so you
could think of knowledge as just being A way
of being latched onto the truth. That's pretty generic,
it's pretty open. It's open, for example, that we
have multiple such ways that, for example, um, sound
deduction in mathematics, that's a way of being latched
onto the truth. Um, PERCEPTUAL awareness of something in
your immediate vicinity, that might be a way of
being latched onto the truth. Testimony, whereby testimony I
mean, um, Instruction from someone who knows a fact,
themselves, so it's sort of secondhand knowledge, that could
also be a way of being latched latched onto
a truth. So you can, you can get it,
you can get it secondhand. So there could be
a variety of different ways of knowing, um, but
the commonality is that you are, um, you're in
the kind of state of mind, um, that can
only unite you to a truth. Um, NOW one
of the things that makes it super tricky is
you can't always tell from the inside whether or
not you're in that state of mind, right? So
you might actually, um, be experiencing an illusion even
though you think, um, that you're in a state
of knowledge. Um, SO it's an immediate consequence of
this way of thinking about knowledge that, um, Uh,
that the question of whether you are or are
not in a state of knowledge is one that's
not always going to be transparent to you. Um,
BUT I think that, that actually fits very intuitively
with how we typically think of knowledge. We typically
think of knowledge in a sense, the same way
we think of gold, right? Um, THERE'S a fact
of the matter about whether something is or isn't
gold. Sometimes you can be mistaken about whether, um,
some The object that's in front of you is
or isn't made out of gold, right? Um, THE
essence of gold is always the same, it's the
element with atomic number 79, um, you can be
mistaken about whether it's there, you know, knowledge is,
is the gold of the cognitive realm, right? It's,
it's that condition that you've got when you're in
the type of mental state that latches you only
onto the truth, um, and, and that condition is
something you could be mistaken about, but, but, but
that is the essence of it.
And about the risk of us being mistaken about
something, when is knowledge reliable? I mean, is there
any set of necessary and sufficient conditions to make
knowledge reliable?
Knowledge is. RELIABLE. Knowledge is definitionally reliable. So, so,
um, there's no such thing as false knowledge and
mistaken knowledge. Um, IT'S inherent in the character of
knowledge that, um, that what is known is true.
Now, you might be asking a related question, which
is, you know, well, how in general can we
obtain knowledge? And um I think one of the
bitter lessons of epistemology is, there's no shortcuts, there's
no like, oh, follow this one weird trick, and,
uh, and your state of mind is guaranteed to
be one of knowledge. Um, IN particular domains, there
are algorithms that we can follow. So, so we
can, we can within certain domains of mathematics, you
know, um, follow the A star algorithm and you'll
have the optimal path for you, you, you know,
but Uh, but there's no general recipe, and that's
just because how the world in general is, is,
is hard to know, um, and we have to
sometimes do a great deal of trial and error,
um, within a domain before we come up with
a generalizable strategy or kind of way of knowing,
um, within that domain that, uh, will, will get
us to the truth there.
And uh we talked about intuitions. What happens when
our intuitions clash with established knowledge? I mean, what
happens uh in terms of how we approach it
or how we should approach it philosophically? How, how
can we resolve that clash?
So when your intuition is, when your intuitions clash
with established knowledge, then your intuitions are wrong, and
you can absolutely have that, um, because, just because
knowledge is fact and knowledge always has to be,
has to be, uh, locking on to the truth.
You can have that, um, so for example, um,
the gambler's fallacy can seem, uh, can seem very
attractive, right? Yeah, I've, I've, I've, um, you know,
You, you, you think that, for example, um, because,
because you've, um, lost a certain number of times
in roulette, you're, you're, you're due to win on
this next, on this next round, that can feel
very attractive even though, you know, mathematically it's, uh,
it's, it's, it's not right at all. Um, SO
when your intuitions clash with established knowledge, the intuitions
are wrong, and, um, and you're gonna need to,
if, if you want to get on the right
path of, um, epistemically. Um, TRY to figure out,
uh, uh, try to figure out a better way
of thinking. Which may or may not always be
possible, right? There might be some intuitions that we
just suffer from persistently. The way that we suffer
from certain perceptual illusions persistently, right? Like, like, you
can know that um there are no spots at
the intersections of the Herman grid illusion, but your
eyes, your lying eyes are going to keep telling
you that they're there. Um, SO we have some
cognitive illusions, but I think you might also have
been wondering about what do we do when our
intuitions conflict not with established knowledge, but with established
theory. So there might be, there might be some
theory that is really dominant in your area, but
you keep feeling some sense that for particular cases,
Um, the right answer is not in line with
that theory, and I think, I, I think when
you have that, um, that's, that's often gold, right?
That's often an indication that there's something wrong with
the theory. Um, AND, and like more precisely, I
think if you've got a theory that generates contradictory
intuitions or contradictory predictions for particular cases, that's a
sign something's really wrong with the theory, and um
you can take inspiration from that and try to
build a better, try to build a better theory,
for sure.
Yeah. And is knowledge a mental state or is
it something different from a mental state?
So I characterize knowledge as a mental state, and
in that again, I'm following Williamson. So what is
a mental state? I mean, it's a state of
the subject um that guides action and, um, uh,
you know, governs how that subject will behave in
the world. There's been some resistance to characterizing knowledge
as a mental state because it has that objectivity
condition, right? That it's an essential part of knowledge
that Um, that it's content, the propositional content that
is known must be true of the world. And,
uh, and some people think mental states can't involve
conditions that lie outside, for example, the brain of
the subject. Um, I think that's actually a mistaken
view of what mental conditions are and a mistaken
view of what we are as agents. We as
agents are in an interesting way. Integrated with the
environments in which we find ourselves. So, for example,
when you form a representation of something like, I'm
gonna show you a pen, see this pen? Um,
It actually matters that you have some kind of,
this is true for the viewers of the video
as well, you have some kind of causal impact
with this particular pen, now you can have thoughts
about this pen and so on. Um, BEFORE this
came into your, um, causal path, when it was
still just on my desk, uh, and you hadn't
seen it, you couldn't have a mental state that
involved that particular pen. Uh, IN its content. So,
so, when we think about things or form representations
of things, we're very much reliant on our interactions
with the world to populate, um, the representations that
we're forming. And, um, you might think, well, no,
maybe the representation is really just ultimately about Um,
activation in my retina or it's about cortical activity.
But I think that way of proceeding really denies
the ultimate fact of what you are as an
agent. What you are as an agent isn't just
um contained inside your skin, it's Something that really
happens in relation to an environment. So as a
knowing agent, you have a whole bunch of capacities
with to act in your environment and with respect
to the environment. So I think it's completely legitimate
to build um Uh, to build conditions involving the
external world into the characterization of what you are
as an agent. The more you know, the more
effective you are as an agent. If you take
a non-factive mental state like belief, just being really
opinionated doesn't necessarily make you an effective agent in
the world. Um, SO if mental states are supposed
to explain the effectiveness of our agency, no reason
not at all, not to be thinking of them
in terms of this stronger condition of knowledge and
not just um the condition of belief. That said,
like, I'm not denying that belief is a mental
state too, and it's a fact about us that
some of our beliefs, some of our our false
beliefs, um, will make us act certain ways as
agents, absolutely. Um, BUT the fact that belief is
in the picture doesn't mean that we should never
think of this stronger condition of knowledge as being
one of the keys, um, to our agency.
Right, and what is the difference between knowing something
and just happening to be right about it? So
let's say that for example, I'm doing a quiz
or playing a trivia game, and in one of
the questions, I mean, I don't actually know the
correct answer, but I just uh luckily pick the
correct one. I mean, what's the difference between that
and actually knowing the correct answer?
So I think just happening to be right about
something isn't necessarily a state of mind. Um, JUST
happening to be right, being right about something, um,
has something in common with knowledge actually. So, um,
if you're right about P, where P is just
any old proposition like that the door is open
or something like that, um, then P has to
be true. Um, SO linguists call this a veridical
construction. Um, AND, and so it's got that in
common with knowledge, right? Cause if you know the
door is open, then the door is open, right?
So it's, it's, it's factive. But being right about
something isn't a mental state, um, and there's a
bunch of, there's a bunch of reasons why. Here's
kind of the cheapest reason, reason why, which is
mental states have the characteristic that only things with
minds can happen, right? So like being happy, I
can be happy, you can be happy, and inanimate,
and that happiness is a mental state. An inanimate
object like, I don't know, like a desk or
a clock can't be happy, right? Cause it doesn't
have a mind. Being right, however, um, now that's
something, you know, the stopped clock is right twice
a day, uh, it doesn't have a mind. Um,
THAT kind of, that kind of example, um, has
led linguists to think, what's going on with being
right is that it has to do more with
communication. Um, THAN with the mental state side of
things. So you can think of, you know, uh,
a report can be right about something. The report
was right that the mayor was being bribed. Um,
A person can be right about something too, uh,
you know, Sarah was right that the mayor was
being bribed. For Sarah to be right that the
mayor is being bribed, she just have to basically
say that, or maybe even think that the mayor
is being bribed. Um, WE don't have any further
conditions on her, how she got to that state,
right? So maybe she's actually a conspiracy theorist, and
she thinks every single government official is being bribed,
and she goes around saying, oh, the mayor is
being bribed, um, and she's never done any homework,
right? And um she actually doesn't know that the
mayor is being bribed, she just says that about
everybody. That's really different from the investigative journalist who
has really pursued the paper trail, and she's been
doing the tape recordings and talking to everybody, and
I, you know, she found out about the Swiss
bank account. That journalist might know that the mayor
is being bribed because the way that she arrived
at her judgment. Um, WAS the kind of way
that can only generate true states of mind. So
it's the right kind of way of thinking about
it. Um, SO that would be the kind of
contrast I'm looking at when I'm looking at the
difference between being right, uh, and knowing. Also, there's
a relationship between being right and knowing. Um, IF
you know, Then you gotta be right about it,
but it doesn't go the other way. You can
be right about something without knowing. So knowing is
that stronger state, um, sort of the ideal state
in epistemology. Mhm.
So another kind of question, what is the epistemic
value of reflection? I mean, what kind of epistemic
value can we get from it?
This is a really interesting question, I think, especially
lately with large language models. I've done a little
bit of uh writing in connection with that. Um,
REFLECTION is usually the contrast category with intuition. So
intuition you can think of as, um, a spontaneous
judgment that's not arrived at through explicit consideration of
steps. Um, WHEN you just judge that. Now, that
guy in the jury didn't know that the man
was innocent. It's not like you're working from some
theoretical understanding of knowledge and doing a bunch of
calculations, you just have that kind of gut sense.
Um, REFLECTIVE cognition, on the other hand, does go
through. Uh, A series of steps that are accessible
to you, um, introspectively if you want. So, so
you can think of, um, the contrast in terms
of maybe something you could draw from arithmetic. So,
um, so if I ask you to multiply 9
by 11, um, the answer pops into mind immediately,
um, but if I ask you to divide 9
by 11, maybe you have to do a bunch
more steps, um, and, uh, and like the process
of long division. Um, YOU'RE doing a series of
steps, each one of which, each digit by digit
calculation might be intuitive, but that whole process of
stringing them together, which you're running in something like
working memory, um, uh, it, that whole process is
called, is called reflective. Um, AND, and so reflection
is also a great way to achieve knowledge in
a bunch of different domains. When you do explicit
mathematical reasoning, you're engaging in reflection. Um, THERE'S some
really interesting questions about cases in which you could
get the answer either through intuition or through reflection.
Um, AND, uh, I mean, even that very simple
case, multiplying 9 by 11, um, you probably just
got the answer in a snap, but if you
didn't, or even if you did, you could go
through, you know, a slow step by step procedure
to, um, to generate that same answer. And, um,
a lot of philosophers have thought that reflection is
always better. Um, I think that's actually wrong, cause
if reflection is just characterized as that step by
step process, there are actually a bunch of cases
in which, um, reflection can lead you astray, right?
Thinking through things explicitly and carefully doesn't always outperform,
uh, going with your gut. So, so I think
that's, uh, I think that's something we have to
note, um, but that said, in a lot of
complex areas, if you add some reflective cognition. To
your thinking, uh, you will tend to do better.
Um, SO we see this with large language models,
when you prompt them to think step by step,
um, or if you're working with one of the
new reasoning models like our one from Deep Seek,
um, you will see a whole chain of thought
before the production of an answer. Um. Answers that
you arrive at that way are often better, and
uh really interesting question, question why that is and
how similar their ways of thinking are to ours.
Um, ONE idea we might have here is that
maybe the individual little steps that you take, um,
are, uh, connecting, um, features either within the neural
network or features within the scope of your own
knowledge that are relatively close to each other, so
it's easier to see the connections step by step.
Uh, AND making them explicit, um, really brings to
bear, uh, a great deal of the power of
your mind. Um, BUT it's, or, or, of, of,
of the neural network to sort out a good
path to the answer. But, but things are, things
are complicated, I think both for us and for
the neural networks, there's questions of the sort of
fidelity of these chain of thought. Reasoning reports to
the actual processing that's going on, both for them
and for us. So, I think that's actually a
really, uh, really interesting open area. I don't think
that knowledge has to be reflective in order to
count as knowledge. So some people do, some people
think you have to sort of give some kind
of proof of what you know. Uh, IN order
to really count as knowing it. I think that
can't possibly be right, not least because it's going
to lead right away to some kind of horrible
regress, right? So, so I have to give some
kind of little proof in order to count as
knowing. But then, what's the status of those individual
claims that I made in the course of my
individual proof? Do I have to give a proof
for each of those? Um, THIS, this ends up
leading to, I think, something pretty self-destructive. So that's
not a direction I'd want to go in.
Mhm. And what is common knowledge? I mean, what
is it and um why is it important for
us to study it as an epistemic phenomenon and
does it connect in any way to other kinds
of epistemic phenomena?
Common knowledge is such an exciting area. So, um,
So when we look at common knowledge, we're moving
beyond the individual, um, and I think we have
intuitively, um, some kind of strong sense of what
it is for something to be commonly known, and
I think it's actually something that's guiding our conversational
interactions, for example. So, um, discussions of common knowledge
often start with a kind of intuitive contrast between
two different situations, um, both of which involve, let's
say just two people, let's keep this simple. Um,
SO we've got two people, Alice and Bob. And
in situation A, there's some secret, call it P.
And Alice knows the secret, and Bob knows the
secret. Um, BUT neither one of them knows that
the other one knows, right? Um, THIS is a
situation in which it's true that Alice and Bob
both know the P, um, but it's not like
out in the open between them, right? Um, THEY
do not have common knowledge in this case. They
have just what's called individual knowledge. For them to
have common knowledge, they've got to have something more.
So in a, in a situation where Alice and
Bob have sat down face to face and they've
talked to each other about the secret, um, it's,
it's considered to be common knowledge now between Alice
and Bob. And having, they're having common knowledge enables
them to do a bunch of things that they
couldn't have done before. Um, SO for example, maybe
P is the fact that their friend Charlie is
having a surprise party on Friday or something like
that. Um, WHEN each of them just knew this
fact individually, but didn't know that the other one
knew. Um, THEY can't, Alice and Bob can't, for
example, coordinate their actions and book a taxi together,
um, to get to the party. But if it's
out in the open between them, they can, they
can rationally coordinate. And, um, and so what is
and isn't common knowledge among a group of people
has big impacts on what they can do collectively,
what they can do together. Uh, AND so for
this reason, it's a very important concept in economics,
in political science. The thing that's amazing philosophically is
it's actually really hard, um, to characterize what changes
or what's different, um, between that situation of individual
private knowledge and the situation where something's out in
the open between them. Um, AND a lot of
the first steps that you think would work here
don't work, right? So you might think, oh, what's
different is when something's out in the open between
people, then Alice knows that Bob knows and Bob
knows that Alice knows. That state, and there's, it's
still just as individuals, that state is not common
knowledge. That state's called mutual knowledge level 2. So
if Alice knows that Bob, you can just do
the counting. Alice knows that Bob knows, you get
to 2, and Bob knows that Alice knows, 2
on each side. Um, THAT state still doesn't allow
them to rationally coordinate. So you can just imagine,
what if they don't interact on the point with
a face to face conversation, but what if Alice
finds out in some backhand manner that Bob knows
about the secret. Maybe she, you know, finds his
phone and, and Bob knows that Alice knows because,
uh, you know, he installed some kind of video
camera and sees her learning about it. Um. At
this point, like there's kind of no reason for
them not to coordinate, but you can make the
secret something kind of dangerous or toxic, uh, in
which case, uh, in which case coordination could be
difficult. So, for example, imagine that they're both in
a motorcycle gang together, and P is the fact
that, um, you know, some new member of the
gang, uh, we'll call him Charlie again, uh, is
actually a police informant. Uh, RIGHT? And maybe Alice
and Bob are struggling with the decision. Should I
leave this gang, or, uh, or, or not. They
might have a question about whether to immediately report
Charlie to the gang boss, or maybe they want
to go seek Charlie's protection. Um, WHEN each of
them finds out individually that Charlie is police, uh,
neither of them knows that the other knows. Uh,
IT'S kind of dangerous for either of them to
act on that, uh, potentially dangerous for either of
them to act on that information. If, for example,
you imagine a situation where they can only get
police protection if at least two gang members, um,
go to the police, uh, you know, but each
of them discovering. That the other has already found
out the secret, still can leave them in that
kind of ambiguous position. And the crazy thing is,
level 3 mutual knowledge, level 4 mutual knowledge, level
5 mutual knowledge, all of these are demonstrably not
equivalent to that common knowledge state of having something
out in the open between people. Um, SO a
lot of my work lately has been just trying
to figure out, oh, how is that common knowledge
state built, if it's not just built out of
iterations or repetitions of individual knowledge. So I can,
I can tell, I can tell you something about
how that state is built actually if you're curious.
yes, please go ahead.
Yes, OK, so, um. So, this conversation we're having
right now is a little unusual, because it's not
like the conversation you have with a friend, right?
Because I'm just going on and on and uh
you're not saying very much. This kind of conversation
called storytelling, right? I as a speaker, I'm taking
an extended turn. Usually when you're chatting with a
friend, it's a lot more back and forth. And,
and actually you get a bigger sense of common
ground, common knowledge, uh, just chatting with a friend,
um, than you do in an interview. Partly because
your job as an interviewer isn't to build common
ground with me. Your job as a, as an
interviewer is to ask me questions to prompt me
to tell my story, right? But if the two
of us were actually sitting down together and trying
to figure something out, like, just a second, do
you think the mayor is taking bribes? We'd be
feeling a lot more common ground formation. But I
think maybe we're feeling a bit like you're giving
me a little bit of uh there. So, uh,
so, so I think, you know, you're following what
I'm saying. Um, I think it's actually really crucial
to face to face conversation that it's two-way. And
it's two-way, not just in that, in a conversation,
people have to take turns, right? We know that.
Um, IT'S two-way in a deeper way, um, which
is that at any given moment in the conversation,
You've got two roles. You've got the speaker and
the addressee. I'm right now the speaker, you're the
addressee. As a speaker, I get to use the
whole vocabulary of the language. As addressee, you're very
restricted. You can just basically, mhm or huh? What?
No? Yeah. You're basically restricted to this on what
I'm saying, right? The two of us together are
a kind of dyad, we're a kind of system.
I'm the generator, you're the evaluator. We as a
dyad, haven't bought into anything, we haven't commonly made
a judgment, unless I propose it and you accept
it. If you're sitting there, mm, we haven't got
that ground as a dyad, right? But if you,
if you buy in, um, then we have. So,
so, so there's this condition involving both of us
in dyadic judgment. Of course, not everything we judge
as a dyad is something that we come to
know, right? I might say something that's kind of
nonsense and you're like, yeah, right. Um, AND, and
then we've judged something together, but we've judged it
falsely. So there's a big question like, how do
you explain specifically the emergence of not just dyadic
judgment, but dyadic knowledge. Um, AND I think there
it turns out there's like a really interesting sort
of evolutionary process in the way in which we
supply back channel signals. Um, SO one of the
things we're doing when we supply back channel signals
is we're indicating what we do and don't know.
So I have a question for you. Can I
ask you a question?
Yes, of course.
OK, so what does it mean when you say,
oh, In response to something that someone said, what
do you think that means?
What does
that mean? What does it mean? Yeah, if you
say, oh, when someone says, says something to you,
what does that mean? Or what does that signal
do, would you say?
Uh, I mean, at least you're acknowledging that you
received the information, right, because,
oh, yeah, yeah, absolutely, it's, it's, it's, uh, it's,
it's, it's an acknowledgement, it's a receipt signal. It
actually means something a little bit more than that
though, which is kind of cool. So, um, there's
some situations in which when you, when someone tells
you something, you don't produce an, oh. Um, SO
for example, um, if you are a teacher, and
you ask your students a pretty easy question, one
of them gives you the answer, you would not
usually say, oh, You would say, yes, that's right,
um, right? So on the basis of that sort
of thing, people have formed a theory, this is
going back to John Heritage's work in the 1980s,
people have formed the theory that, oh, is an
epistemic change of state marker. So what you're signaling
when you say, oh, is, I did not know
that, and now I do, right? That's what you're
signaling. You can send a deceptive signal, right? Like,
so if somebody's telling you like some old gossip
that you already knew, you can fake it and
go, oh wow, you're pretending that you're gaining knowledge,
you're not really. Um, BUT that's sort of, that's
a fake signal and that's parasitic on the ordinary
evolved meaning of, oh. And if you think about,
like, in some cases, like, suppose I tell you,
Charlie's having a party on Friday night, you could
respond, Oh, are you going? That would kind of
indicate you didn't know about the party before. Or
say, Charlie's having a party on Friday night, you
go, Yeah, are you going? That second time with
the, yeah, you're indicating maybe you already knew, or
it's not surprising to you. So we're kind of
indicating surprise. Now that fact that we're doing it,
and we're doing it without thinking that we're doing
it, right? So if you look at um sort
of older histories of English or of other languages,
and you see what people say about these interjections,
like, oh, they don't get it, they don't get
what the function is. So Wittgenstein thinks it's, oh,
it's just like a sigh. It's not really doing
anything or saying anything. Um, uh, Heritage points out
Charles Carpenter Fries, who wrote The Structure of English,
he says both O is non-communicative. And he also
says it's a signal of continued attention. I think
there's a contradiction there. Something can't be both non-communicative
and a signal, but, um, but also it's not
strong enough. Like I do think it's a marker
of knowledge gain. The fact that in conversations with
each other, we're actually constantly sending out these little
markers of knowledge gain, for example, um, that's something
that really helps us map out what other people
do and don't know. And um as we get
better and better maps of what other people do
and don't know, we gradually get better and better
at forming common knowledge um with them. Um, SO,
so these signals can go astray and they can
be misused, but sort of in the course of
time, we get sculpted towards being better and better
at, uh, at forming common ground. Maybe we're actually
better at this in face to face conversation than
we are on Zoom or the internet, for sure.
Um, BUT that's, that's the sort of rough sketch
of, uh, the kind of process that we go
through. And, and so the way I look at
it, common knowledge is something that happens when two
minds are actually really working together on a problem
as a system. It's not something that's just happening
when you've got two individuals who are forming impressions
of each other and that higher order impressions of
what this other person. He knows that I know
that he knows that I know, right? I don't
think that's how it's working. I think it's working,
um, really dyadically. It's, it's common knowledge is a
situation in which knowledge gain has become a team
sport, um, uh, that's, that's the way I look
at it.
Yeah, so I have just a couple more questions
on the same topic. So I know that you've
written about um experimental philosophy. So how do you
look at the relationship between experimental philosophy and traditional,
or perhaps we could call it also. So armchair
philosophy. I mean, is it hostile or
not? Sometimes, sometimes. Uh, INITIALLY, I think it was
quite hostile. So first just say something about what
experimental philosophy is. Um, SINCE the time of, at
least the time of Plato, philosophers have been sort
of consulting their gut to see, yeah, is it,
is it, is it just or unjust to, you
know, Um, return a weapon that you borrowed to
a friend who's now out of his mind. God,
that's, that's not a good thing to do. Uh,
SO philosophers have been consulting like intuitions about particular
cases for a really long time, uh, maybe from
the armchair, from the gut. What the experimental philosophy
movement started doing was formal data collection on those
kinds of cases. Uh, AND, and so that instead
of just letting a philosopher make a judgment about
a case, um, They took it to the street
and had, you know, usually a large batch of
undergraduates or crowd workers on the internet make judgments
about a case, and those judgments are sometimes, but
not always in line with things that the philosophers
say. I think a lot of experimentalists were worried
about the fact that if I've got my big
theory of knowledge, I'm going to think about a
particular case and say, oh yeah, this person doesn't
know that fact. I'll be really kind of swayed
or pushed by what my own theory. Um, WOULD
predict for that case, and it's much fairer practice,
it's better practice to go, uh, look at what
a bunch of randomly selected individuals will say. Um,
AND there were some kind of surprising findings early
in this process, so a very famous paper around
the turn of the century by Weinberg, Nichols, and
Stitch seemed to suggest that, um, Ordinary people's intuitions
about cases like that one I described with Dharmatara
and the cloud of insects, those are now known
as Gettier cases in Western philosophy after a 1963
paper by Edmund Gettier. Um, AND so, so this
paper seemed to suggest that ordinary people's intuitions on
Gettier cases are not the same as philosophers. That
result ended up not replicating and in fact, um,
much bigger studies with bigger populations and so on
showed that. Um, THAT, that, uh, intuition is pretty,
uh, it's pretty strong, it's pretty cross-culturally robust. Um,
SO, I think, um, Uh, you know, my feeling
is always like all roads lead to the sea,
ultimate, oh sorry, all rivers lead to the sea.
Not all roads do, that's just a false claim.
All rivers lead to the sea ultimately. Uh, AND
so, you know, if we've got various paths to
try and figure out the nature of knowledge, the
nature of intuitions, and so on, let's, let's, let's
take them all and see, see, see where they,
where they lead us. Um, I think that philosophy
ultimately has nothing to fear from. Uh, EXPERIMENTAL methods,
um, but I think, you know, the other thing
is experimental methods aren't always, uh, aren't always necessary.
Uh, uh, I think a lot of times your,
uh, seat of the pants intuition can be pretty
good. That's something that's sort of held up pretty
well in linguistics, so there's sort of a similar
worry in linguistics that a lot of linguists were
looking at minimal pairs of sentences and kind of
Judging in a gut way which one was and
wasn't uh acceptable, and there's a worry about whether
people on the street would feel the same way.
I think that worry has been largely put to
bed at this point and, uh, um, and there
are still definitely cases where it's, it's eye-opening to
go out and see what ordinary people think, but,
um, but I don't think that that is always,
uh, always necessary. So I don't think experimental philosophy
has to be. Um, HOSTILE to traditional philosophy. I've
done both, so I've done experiments with, uh, colleagues
in psychology, uh, and I certainly do a lot
of traditional work too.
And uh and this will be my last question.
How do you think experimental philosophy could be reconciled
with traditional philosophy? Do you think it would be
possible for us to have uh an armchair friendly
experimental philosophy, and if so, what would it be
like?
Sure. I mean, I think that's the kind of
approach that I've been pursuing in my own work.
And I think one big thing we can do
is not just look at people's intuitions about particular
cases, but we can look at scientific work much
more broadly as epistemology. So I think it can
be very instructive to look at work in comparative
and developmental psychology. If you're trying to figure out
like, how do human beings ever get to a
place where we can detect states of knowledge in
each other, um, a great way to do that
is to look at the sort of strange steps
that children go through, um, as they're, as they're
developing. We're not born being able to detect these
states, and um Along the way, there's some very
interesting milestones in our development. So I think we
can, we can maybe learn something about knowledge detection
and maybe indirectly about the nature of knowledge itself,
um, by, uh, by proceeding in that way, by
looking at the findings of sort of multiple sciences
that might be relevant to what we're doing. I
think we can now also gain a lot from
looking at work in artificial intelligence research. Um, SO
there's a lot of relevant work in Um, common
knowledge, there's relevant work on the nature of curiosity
and surprise, uh, in artificial intelligence research as well.
So, so that, that observation we just had that
when someone tells you something you didn't already know,
you, you, you might react with an oh, might
send that kind of signal. There's this really interesting
thing that, that is something that seems to be
desirable in conversation. It seems to be something that
we're struggling towards, right? Conversations get very boring. If
people are always just telling you things that you
already knew, right? Conversations are fun if there's some
surprising twists and turns. And so there's a question
like, why do we push towards those moments of
unexpected discovery? Um, FOR me, figuring this out was
really a matter of looking at what's going on
in artificial intelligence research with simulated reinforcement learning agents.
Uh, YOU can make them curious, you can make
them behave in ways that look like the curiosity
of humans or animals, by giving them reward for
that state of, Oh, I did not see that
coming, right? And I think, uh, so, so basically
what you're doing is you get them to always
try to predict what's coming next, and they gain
reward from prediction error. Which is really interesting. It's
sort of, it's a little bit counterintuitive because you
might think, ah, we're, what we really want is
for everything to be really predictable. No, if you're
a curious agent, you want that moment of, oh,
wow, didn't see that coming. So you could think
of, oh, as a marker for an educational situation.
It's part of being curious that you have an
appetite for that marker. And of course, the more
curious you are, the more you find out and
the harder you are to surprise. So somebody who
knows a great deal, it's actually kind of hard
to get, oh wow, out of, out of them,
they've heard it before. Um, BUT curiosity makes you
constantly antagonize your world model to look for spots
where you're not sure how this is gonna turn
out. I think this works in conversation too, like
we ask each other questions where you're not sure
in advance what the answer is gonna be. Uh,
THOSE are the more interesting kinds of questions. Even
better is if you have some kind of expectation.
Um, BUT you have enough to generate that feeling
of surprise if someone gives the answer. It's not
interesting to ask somebody a question where you have
just zero expectation of the answer. Like, I'm not
going to ask you for the telephone number of
the largest department store in Russia or something like
that, cause I don't have feelings about that at
all. I don't really care about it. Um, IF
I ask you a question where I think, I'm
kind of 50/50 on this, uh, that's a little
bit more interesting, and that's the maximum expected surprise.
Uh, SO I think there end up being connections
between what sciences are finding in some disciplines and
what we as philosophers want to say. Uh, SO,
so the way I see curiosity, for example, is
very much the way Aristotle saw it, that it's
an intrinsic desire for knowledge, and I think you
can use findings from the sciences, um, to explain.
How that's so and how it works, even in
the context of just ordinary conversations between people. I
think they're curiosity driven most of the time. Some
conversational time is instrumental, it's about 10% is used
for um for, for planning practical things. But most
of the time we're just, uh, you know, trying
to figure things out together. And, um, and I
think working both as a philosopher and as somebody
who's empirically informed. Uh, YOU can make some progress
on how that's going.
Great. So, where can people find you and your
work on the internet?
OK, I have a website at University of Toronto.
Um, SO, I'm there. And I also wrote a
very short introduction to this field called Knowledge, a
very short introduction, uh, and that's available from Oxford
University Press.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a really fascinating conversation.
Murigada, and thank you. Ciao fros.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like, and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on. Patreon or
PayPal, I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seychez Olaf,
Alex Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Eleni, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly, then Dimitri
Robert Windiernai, Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor. Michel
Starmir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal
Herzognun, Macha Jonathan Labyrinth, John Yardston, and Samuel Kerri,
Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardus, Fran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Roma Roch, Diego Londono
Crea, Yannick Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Nele Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov
Zal, Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner. Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan
Cortez, Ursulaitsky, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith, John
Wiseman, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanes, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan, Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.